slip39-backup @VERSION@
Splitting a wallet seed into shares that no one share can open, on an offline
Tails machine.

This file is written for someone who does not use a terminal. Follow it in order.
Nothing here needs the internet, and nothing you do here is sent anywhere.


WHAT IS IN THIS FOLDER

  slip39-backup-@VERSION@-x86_64.AppImage    the app
  SHA256SUMS                                 a fingerprint of the app
  start-here.sh                              checks the app, then opens it
  READ-THIS-FIRST.txt                        this file


STEP 1. COPY THIS WHOLE FOLDER INTO YOUR HOME FOLDER

Open the Files window, drag this folder into Home, and work from the copy.

Programs are usually not allowed to run from a USB stick, so this is not optional.
Copy the whole folder, not just the app: the four files have to stay together.


STEP 2. STAY OFFLINE

Do not connect this machine to the internet, and do not connect to Tor.

The app checks, and stamps anything made while online as INSECURE-TEST: on every
page, in the file names, and inside the backup itself. That stamp does not come
off. A backup carrying it is a rehearsal, not a backup.


STEP 3. RIGHT-CLICK start-here.sh AND CHOOSE "RUN AS A PROGRAM"

A window appears. Go to step 4.

Do not double-click this file. Double-clicking opens it in a text editor and shows
you the instructions it is written in, which is confusing and does nothing.

If "Run as a Program" is not in the menu, the file needs permission to run first:

  1. Right-click start-here.sh and choose Properties
  2. Turn on "Executable as Program"
  3. Close the window, right-click again, and choose "Run as a Program"


The app will not open if you click it directly, and that is on purpose. It is
switched off until start-here.sh has checked it. Going through start-here.sh is
the whole point: it is what turns the app on.


STEP 4. READ THE WINDOW THAT APPEARS

If it says the app has been checked, press Start and the app opens. That is all.

If it says DO NOT USE THIS FILE, then stop. The app on this stick is not the file
that was packaged with these instructions. It may have been damaged while copying,
or changed by something else. Delete it and ask the person who gave you this stick
for a fresh copy. Do not type your seed words into it.


WHAT THE CHECK DOES AND DOES NOT TELL YOU

It tells you the app is exactly the file packaged with these instructions:
not damaged, not half-copied, not altered on the stick afterwards.

It does not tell you the download itself was genuine. The fingerprint travels in
this same folder, so anyone able to replace the app could have replaced the
fingerprint too. For that part you are trusting whoever gave you this stick and
told you it was safe. That is worth knowing rather than assuming.


IF YOU WOULD RATHER CHECK IT YOURSELF

Open Terminal, and type these two lines. The second one prints one line ending in
OK if all is well.

  cd ~/slip39-backup-@VERSION@-tails
  sha256sum -c SHA256SUMS

The fingerprint should be:

  @SHA256@


WHEN YOU ARE USING THE APP

Choose Create backup if you have the wallet's seed words and want to split them.
Choose Recover if you have the shares and want the wallet back.

Creating a backup asks for your seed words, and gives you one zip file to save.
Save it to the USB stick. That zip is a delivery package, not a place to keep
things: open it, move each piece to where it belongs, and delete the zip.

Inside it you will find two documents that tell you what to do next, and they are
written for the moment you are in rather than for later:

  IMPORTANT-READ-FIRST.txt    where each piece goes and what must never sit
                              beside what
  VERIFY-THIS-BACKUP.txt      how to prove the backup opens using programs
                              written by other people, before you hand out a
                              single share

Do the verification while this machine is still on and the shares are still all
in front of you. That is the last moment at which finding a problem is cheap.


WHAT YOU MUST END UP WITH, IN TWO SEPARATE PLACES

The shares, and the one encrypted file. Both are needed to recover, and neither
one on its own reveals anything.

  shares/          each share is a page of words. Print them, stamp them, or
                   write them out, and put them in different places. Threshold
                   many of them rebuild the key.
  payload/         one file, payload.age.gpg.asc. It is plain text, so it can go
                   into a password manager entry your executor can reach.

Keeping the shares and the encrypted file in the same place is the one mistake
that undoes the whole arrangement. Anyone who finds that place has both halves.


WHEN YOU ARE FINISHED

Shut Tails down. It keeps nothing, so the app, this folder and everything you
typed are gone when the machine turns off. What survives is what you copied to the
USB stick and what you wrote on paper.

Then check, before you walk away, that the seed words are not left anywhere except
where you meant them to be: not on a screen, not in a text file on the stick, not
in a photograph.


ONE WARNING

There is a copy of this app on a website. It is there for looking at, not for use.
Never type real seed words into it. Use this offline copy for anything real.
